Katherine Cox is an AmeriCorps VISTA member proudly serving the at the Family Support Center of South Sound, and is serving primarily at Pear Blossom Place, the largest homeless family shelter in Thurston County.  When asked to consider soliciting in-kind donations of sleeping bags and cots in preparation for “Cold Weather” shelter, a time when the Family Support Center takes on up to 20 additional people each night when the temperatures drop below 38 degrees, Katherine was able to make a great connection with the manager of REI at the Capital Mall. 
When Katherine approached the manager and explained what the products would be used for, REI donated nearly two car loads full of sleeping bags, sleeping pads, cots, tents, and other cold weather supplies, totaling over $2,100 in value. REI also agreed to donate even more product from their local warehouse come December, and it is hoped that this will be a sustained connection for years to come.
Pear Blossom decided to open up “cold weather services” 4 days early due to the freezing cold temperatures; Katherine was happy to see that the sleeping bags, cots, pads and mats were being put to good use, and that they were made available to families who had nowhere else to go. 
In addition, she recently made a connection with a local cab company, who’s agreed to help transport homeless families to the shelter in the event that folks have no mode of transportation, and they are willing to negotiate a discounted rate in partnership with Family Support Center’s mission. Details are still being finalized. Meanwhile, Katherine is still actively seeking hotels that are willing to accept vouchers in the event that Pear Blossom reaches maximum capacity on cold weather nights.
*
Pear Blossom Place is staffed 100% by volunteers and interns every night from 5:00pm to 7:00am; their support is crucial to keeping Pear Blossom’s doors open. Since the beginning of her term of service in August, Katherine has participated in the recruitment, training and support of 64 new volunteers. 31 are either actively volunteering or are newly trained, while 33 are potential volunteers that are inquiring, or preparing to complete their training. Katherine has leveraged support from community partners and advertising avenues, such as Coffee News, The Olympian, OlyBlog, Olympia Works in Progress, college newspapers, Just Serve, flyering, social media, and through personal community connections. Katherine attributes her success to her caring friends and family, her supportive mentor Natalie Moran, and her on-going VISTA Blend trainings in Volunteer Mobilization. 
Although Katherine was very nervous about stepping into a role that required her to learn a completely new set of professional skills, she’s very excited about everything that she’s learning, and that her efforts are helping to build capacity for this organization to serve families of Thurston County.



