May Story of Service: Crossing the finishing line for fundraising!
By Katherine Cox
Site: Family Support Center of South Sound
Although the planning of the first annual Mother’s Day 5K Run started back in November, it has truly been a learning experience for AmeriCorps VISTA Katherine Cox as she observed and participated in the full-length process of organizing a new fundraising opportunity! 
From start to the finish line, Katherine meet weekly with staff, supportive volunteers and board members to organize the logistics of the Family Support Center’s very first 5K run; the location, the date and time, the theme and title, the nuts and bolts, the drafting of ideas, organization and much more. Katherine worked diligently with her site to help identify potential sponsors and leverage current and new partnerships to aid the success of the run, as well as other upcoming fundraisers in June and even for the next fiscal year.  She reached out to dental clinics, hospitals, local businesses, advertising sites, new and current volunteers, newspapers, friends and family etc. to help sponsor, raise funds and participate in a family-friendly event supporting low-income families of Thurston County.
Some of the in-kind donations she secured for the participant goodie bags included $598 worth of lip balms from local fair-trade cosmetic company Alaffia, 200 sample packets of soap from BioKleen and free advertisement from Olympia’s widely distributed Coffee News; all new resources leveraged during her term of her service. Additionally, one of Katherine’s volunteer recruit connections resulted in a generous sponsorship from Fred Meyer with a $1000 sponsorship!
With over 20 sponsors covering the costs of the run and with the support of over 30 volunteers helping on the day of the event, the dedicated 197 participants walked, jogged and ran on the Family Support Center’s very first annual Mother’s Day 5K to support local children and families in the community, raising over $9000! The fundraiser was deemed to be a huge success, and is eagerly anticipated to take place next year as well. 
One of Katherine’s favorite moments was learning that her mother, Cyndi Cox (pictured on right) was the top funder, who rose over $200 for the run. Katherine got to announce the wonderful news over the load speaker at Mixx 96’s booth; an extra special way to honor her mother! To top it off, Katherine proudly crossed the finish line alongside her family; her Aunt Cathy Blakeway representing Tumwater Fire Department; her cousin Breanne Warren representing WSECU with her 4yr old daughter Cori; and her mother, Cyndi Cox representing City of Olympia Human Resources. It was the perfect end to a perfect event; it was surreal to finally finish after months of hard work and planning!    
