A Story of Service: February 2015
By Katherine Cox
Christmas time was a busy time at the Family Support Center! Several groups and communities offered services such as free family portraits, visits with Santa Claus, home-cooked meals galore—all while preparing for the Family Support Center’s holiday adoption program; an annual program where community members and organizations come together to adopt one (or more!) families in need, giving them a bright and generous holiday! 
It was a sweet start for the second quarter of service as AmeriCorps VISTA member Katherine Cox successfully coordinated 72 confirmed adoptions for families in need. Because of Katherine’s hard work, 281 people varying in a range of circumstances were able to enjoy the gift of Christmas; from families living in shelter to families newly transitioned into stable housing. 
In an effort to serve the frequent on-pour of families asking for help, Katherine utilized complimentary radio time generously offered by the Mixx 96 radio station, reached out to family and friends in person and via social media, coordinated with other local businesses and partnering organizations, credit unions, hospitals, grocery stores, cafes—you name it.  As a result, an estimated $30,000 in-kind gift donations and holiday meals were made possible by Olympia’s generous and giving community.
In addition to the holiday festivities, Katherine coordinated with local volunteer photographers in connection with “Help Portrait” who offered free professional family pictures at the shelter. Parents, babies, children and even service dogs dressed up in their finest to smile for the camera; each family was given a full size print of their family picture and a complimentary CD with extra photos. 
The staff noted that they were able to serve maybe 23 families last year through the holiday program; they were very proud to share hugs, tears, and heart-warming gratitude with so many families. Katherine was very happy with the outcome of the work she did to help her organization support so many people; sometimes we forget what Christmas looks like for families who are struggling to get by on paycheck to paycheck, or families fleeing domestic violence and had to leave everything behind. 
One particular memory Katherine will never forget was watching a mother and her two children at Pear Blossom Place shelter, opening some of the gifts early in an effort to find place to store them—the organization that adopted them had given them so much, they didn’t know where to put it all! The mother said, “This is the best Christmas my children have ever had; this is the first year they got everything they asked for! I wasn’t expecting this!” Katherine watched Mom wiping away tears of overwhelming joy  as she open gift card after gift card; her children were so excited as they played with some of their new toys, dressed warmly in their new coats. 
Tis the season to get things done!


