Table of Contents
First thing’s first: WATCH Account
Current Procedure & Paperwork
Past-Current Training Manuals
Additional Resources and Enrichment (w/ contacts)
Domestic Violence 101









First Thing’s First: WATCH Account
Make sure you fill out this paperwork and hand it off to our receptionist Malaika, so she can get Schelli to sign off on it and turn it in for you. This needs to be filled out so you can run background checks on volunteers!
If you don’t get confirmation within a week, be sure you email and follow up; we had several staff members (including myself) who didn’t hear back about their paperwork or get their account activated, and had to resend it. Do not share your password with anyone; if they find out you’re sharing accounts, your account could be revoked, which is really frustrating!















Current Procedure & Paperwork
Step 1: I invite people to the training, and make sure to give at least 5 days advanced notice for a reminder; include location, date, time.
Step 2: I review the training manual with them, which incorporates some light group work and reporting back.
Step 3: Next I run their background checks. If there are any concerns, I need to have Patty or Schelli review it and sign off if they are approved. 
Step 4: If all is clear or paperwork is approved, I activate their accounts in Volgistics, add their info to the spreadsheet and send them the “welcome” email with info on how to sign up for shifts; let them know they need to coordinate with you about signing up for their first shift with a veteran volunteer who can help show them the ropes.
Step 5: If I don’t see they’ve signed up or taken a shift within a month, I follow up and check-in via email. 
*Tip: Check out the Volunteer Management & Recruitment sections of your main Sustainability Binder to info on communication and recruitment.











Past-Current Training Manuals
These are some of our past training manuals, including ones prior to my service. I recommend at least reviewing them to see how the training has evolved and changed. Pay attention to the manual from February, where Cold Weather training is involved.
One thing that I think really helped was offering opportunities for group work and critical thinking. One of my volunteers—a school teacher in her professional work—suggested “check for understanding” are volunteers absorbing what they learned? Provided a tricky situation, how will the respond based on the information you’ve shared?
Think of ways to integrate that through-out the training, and think about follow up questions. Also, using scenarios inspired from actual events are a good starting point! 













Additional Resources and Enrichment
In this section, I have recruited additional notes and resources from other organizations, such as Habitat for Humanity, Safe Place, Side Walk and other staff members. These resources discuss anti-oppression, sensitivity, self-care, cultural awareness, how to be trauma informed, conflict resolution, etc. as well as their applications and training manuals. 
There is a list of potential contacts you can reach out to for supplemental trainings, or ways to improve the manual we currently have. Some of them are also contacts for client resources, or could be potentially used for staff trainings/guest speakers. 
The one for United Way is with South Sound Volunteer Coordinators; I recommend you attend every third Wednesday of the month! As a volunteer coordinator, it’s great to hear about what other organizations are doing and encourage resource sharing! Some of the best tips, ideas and partnership opportunities came from these meetings.
I also was volunteering at the Olympia Free Clinic, Homeless Point-in-Time Census and occasionally GRuB; finding a way to keep the volunteering experience in perspective helped me reflect and learn how to support volunteers, how to handle conflicts and concerns, how to keep folks engaged, and even gave me ideas for improving the weekly Monday updates; I looked at what other successful volunteer coordinators are doing so I had some model for doing my job well. I know you’re going to be busy, but I do recommend doing some side volunteer work to continue improving, and keep your “volunteer perspective” sharp!

NAME
SPECIALTY 
NOTES
Sammy Harvell
Anti-Oppression; LGBQT & racism
$100=2hrs will negotiate
Carrie Ann Clark
Anti-Oppression & Sensitivity
Current office volunteer, free counseling
Mylinda Baits
First Aid Arts trauma
Available winter 2016
Meg Martin
Harm reduction, cultural humility, open trainings
Interfaith Works Program director
Sara Kukkonen
Volunteer Coordination
United Way of Thurston
Malaika Halley
Experienced anti-oppression trainer 
*Only ask for resources
Amory Ballantine
Vicarious Trauma & self-care
Experienced DV advocate from Safe Place
Preethie Capezio
Self-Care
Acupuncture/massage
Evan Ferber
Conflict Resolution (Dispute Resolution Center)
lead customized training in past


























Domestic Violence 101
Although as a VISTA you are not in a direct service position, and your volunteers will NOT be qualified to serve as an advocate for a DV survivor (which takes extensive training and experience) it’s a good idea to educate yourself on domestic violence, as it impacts a huge percentage of families that Family Support Center serves through The Family Justice Center.
I’d really like to see our training talk more about how Family Justice Center supports survivors, and share information that helps people understand some of the basics of DV. Again, making it very clear that volunteers are not certified to work with survivors, but the additional knowledge and awareness will help build and instill the values of the agency when using best practices to support someone experiencing DV, whether it’s immediate or in their past.
Domestic Violence is one of the most prevalent factors in homelessness across the board, and there is no limit to who experiences it; men, women, children, people of color, members of LGBQT, long-time married couples, folks with drug addiction, folks that are financially well off and respected in society, and so on. 
*Tip: Natalie is the DV Queen at FSC, and was instrumental to the recent progress of Family Justice Center. Definitely ask her about other resources and ideas to enrich the training if you need more support in this area.








Outside-Organization Forms & Resources
During my VISTA term I reached out to places like Habitat for Humanity or Side Walk to get information about what their training looks like, what their protocol is, how they utilize volunteers, their recruitment methods, among other questions. I’ve included their applications, training manuals and correspondence for outside examples.
I also was volunteering at the Olympia Free Clinic, Homeless Point-in-Time Census and occasionally GRuB; finding a way to keep the volunteering experience in perspective helped me reflect and learn how to support volunteers, how to handle conflicts and concerns, how to keep folks engaged, and even gave me ideas for improving the weekly Monday updates. 
