Organization Name:
Family Support Center of South Sound
Website Address:
www.fscss.org
Legal Applicant:
 Name:  Trish Gregory
Title:    Executive Director

Address: P.O. Box 784
City: Olympia       Zip: 98507

Telephone:  360-754-9297 x206
Email:  trishg@fscss.org 
Member Service Location
Address: 201 Capitol Way North
City: Olympia     Zip: 98501
Primary Supervisor
 Name:  Natalie Moran
Title:    Deputy Director

Address: P.O. Box 784
City: Olympia  Zip: 98507

Telephone:  360-754-9297 x218
Email:  nataliem@fscss.org
Employer ID # (EIN):
91-2003828
APPLICATION DETAILS
VISTA Project Summary:
(maximum 7 lines of text)
This VISTA project will support the Family Support Center of South Sound in furthering organizational capacity to effectively and efficiently operate Pear Blossom Place, the largest 24-hour homeless family shelter in the region. The VISTA member will be responsible for volunteer recruitment, coordination of volunteer appreciation and retention related events, identify and increase in-kind and financial resource potentials, coordinate the annual holiday adoption program, and work directly with the Development team to establish a fund development plan for Pear Blossom Place. 
Focus Area and Objective:
Economic Opportunity
  Financial Literacy   
  Housing         
  Employment

Education
  School Readiness        
  K-12 Success     
  Post-Secondary Success

Healthy Futures
  Obesity and Food Security    
  Access to Health Care    

Veterans and Military Families
  Veterans and Families Served    
Number of VISTAs requested:
1 (one)
Boroughs/Census Areas Served:
Thurston County; Legislative District 22, Congressional District 10
AmeriCorps VISTA Site Application
United Way of Thurston County

Due Date: Friday, March 10, 2017, 5:00pm
Section I: APPLICANT INFORMATION


Section II: ORGANIZATIONAL CAPACITY

1. How does your proposed VISTA project support your organization’s mission?

The Family Support Center of South Sound is a nonprofit 501c3 multi-service agency located in downtown Olympia, Washington. Founded in 1992, the agency provides families with coordinated supportive services in one centralized location with the mission, “Working Together to Strengthen All Families”. The Family Support Center seeks to build strong, healthy, safe, and hopeful families through collaborative programs and services, with the goal to reduce the impacts of family and child poverty, homelessness, and family violence in the South Sound region. Utilizing a “one-stop-shop” model, families with children and survivors of domestic violence, sexual assault, stalking, and human trafficking are provided with access to multiple on-site services which promote safety, health and wellbeing. The Family Support Center operates the largest 24-hour homeless family shelter in the entire region, Pear Blossom Place, offering 36 beds every night for parents and children. Pear Blossom Place is kept open nightly thanks to a minimum of four community volunteers. Onsite at Pear Blossom Place are comprehensive supportive services and case management for the shelter families, in addition to tenants from the seven permanent affordable housing units also onsite. The VISTA project will strengthen the Family Support Center’s volunteer recruitment and training efforts, which are key to the success of Pear Blossom Place and volunteer retention. The VISTA project will further develop training materials, identify community partnerships that will strengthen the volunteer program, and will identify new and creative ways to recruit volunteers. Additionally, the VISTA project will develop a fund development plan specifically for Pear Blossom Place, identifying funding opportunities to ensure the shelter and affordable housing program remains available for homeless families with children. The VISTA project will build organizational capacity to ensure the needs of all families are met through collaboration and community engagement. 

2. Have you hosted VISTA members in the past?  If so, for how many years and through what sponsoring agency?
Yes    	No		How many years:  2	Sponsoring Agency:  Washington Service Corps 2014-2015, United Way of Thurston County 2015-2016

3. If you have hosted VISTAs in the past, describe how this project builds upon or differs from previous projects.
The Family Support Center has hosted two VISTA members, one from 2015-2016, and a second from 2016-2017. This VISTA project builds upon the strengths and successes of the previous VISTA members, and focuses in specifically on volunteer recruitment and training. This position does not include any volunteer coordination responsibilities, rather shifts the project to build recruitment and retention capacity of the volunteer program. Additionally, this VISTA project will incorporate more development related duties, including grant/funding identification, establishing a fund development plan for Pear Blossom Place, and participation and coordination of Family Support Center related events. This VISTA member will take the lead on writing grants and fund requests, will input data into the organization’s donor and grant database, and will work closely with the Development Director to support with fund development efforts. 

4. Identify the staff that will dedicate sufficient time to timely recruit, interview, and select your VISTA member(s).   Outline your recruitment, interview, and selection process; including your plans to seek a diverse candidate pool that includes, but is not limited to, candidates from the communities you serve. 
Name: Natalie Moran	
Title: Deputy Director
Contact Information: 360-754-9297 x218 nataliem@fscss.org 
Outline: 
 Recruitment: The Family Support Center will recruit qualified VISTA applicants by leveraging relationships we have already developed with local colleges, universities, state, and community based agencies. We will market and advertise the position widely within the nonprofit community, to the families we serve, our community partners, on our website, as well as to the general public via online methods. The Family Support Center is dedicated to attracting a diverse candidate pool that is reflective of the community we live in and the clients we serve. We have found that the most successful way in ensuring we have a culturally diverse applicant pool is to advertise the position with our community partners who share our commitment to serving under-served, low income, and marginalized members of our community. We do not anticipate any difficulties in recruiting qualified individuals – we historically have been successful in attracting volunteers and AmeriCorps members from throughout the nation. 
Interview and Selection process: Candidates who meet the minimum qualifications and respond to our posting with the appropriate materials by the deadline will be interviewed by a two-person panel of Family Support Center staff and will include both an oral and written interview. Top applicants may be invited for an additional interview. References will be checked before a final selection is made. The applicant who demonstrates the greatest level of qualifications, passion of our mission/vision/values and commitment to the VISTA project will be notified of his/her selection by telephone. Candidates who are not selected will be notified via email. 

5. How will you ensure that your staff will meet timelines in recruiting, interviewing, and selecting your VISTA member(s) and be well versed in the VISTA Program and able to sufficiently describe expectations, requirements, and benefits of the program to candidates?  

Our Deputy Director duties include managing our Human Resources. The Deputy Director and Executive Director are highly experienced in recruiting, interviewing, hiring and training candidates. 19 AmeriCorps members, including Youth In Service and VISTA, have been successfully trained and supervised by the Executive Director and Deputy Director over the past decade, in addition to employees, interns and volunteers. The administrative team manages multiple complex federal programs which include extensive knowledge of laws/regulations/rules, requirements and timely reporting. The Deputy Director is skilled at understanding and communicating program expectations and requirements in clear, concise, professional and supportive manner. Additionally, the Deputy Director will be overseen by Executive Director to ensure all VISTA Program expectations and requirements are met.

6. Provide details below of your plans to provide On-Site Orientation and Training (OSOT) to VISTA members including elements to orient the member(s) to the VISTA Program, your site, the community, and the service they will provide: 

Name of person conducting Orientation
Topics / Description of training
Timeline
VISTA overview: Natalie Moran
Orientation to Family Support Center including mission/values/vision, principles of family support, agency history, policies, procedures, employee/volunteer service member handbook, safety, workspace, technology/equipment use, confidentiality, intro to all programs and staff, VAD, VISTA program/rules/requirements, etc. 
July – August 2017
Site orientation: Natalie Moran
Tour of sites, shelter/housing policies and procedures, introductions to other staff/volunteers, learn about roles of volunteers, meet clients, introduction to current data tracking and scheduling tools/system/methods, domestic violence 101 training, etc. 
July 2017
Community: Trish Gregory
Attending community meetings, meet community partners, learn about community initiatives/efforts/activities/plans as related to VISTA service focus area with the Executive Director including; Coordinated Entry meetings, South Sound Volunteer Coordinator meetings, Homeless Citizens Advisory Committee, Asset Building Coalition, HOME consortium, Housing Task Force/Continuum of Care, Thurston Counsel for Children and Youth, Housing Action Team, Board meetings/committees. 
August – September 2017
Service:  Natalie Moran, Trish Gregory, Keiya Johnson & Rachel Swan
VAD specific service training, volunteer coordination training, housing and shelter programs training/overview, learning community acronyms, budgeting/finance/fundraising/grant writing/donor tracking/events, review current memorandums of understanding, contracts with funders/partner agencies, etc.
July – August  2017


7. Identify the staff person who will provide primary on-going support and supervision to VISTA member(s). 
Name: Natalie Moran   
Title: Deputy Director    
Contact Information: 360-754-9297 x218 nataliem@fscss.org 

8. Identify the staff person who will provide secondary support and supervision to VISTA member(s).
Name:   Keiya Johnson      
Title:   Homeless Family Services Program Manager       
Contact Information:  360-754-9297 x303 keiyaj@fscss.org 

9. List the 3 strategies your supervisor(s) will use to support and retain the VISTA member(s) and ensure they successfully complete their term of service.

1. Weekly or biweekly supervision meetings will be provided in order to discuss any emerging challenges, project updates, and to ensure a successful VISTA term. Supervision will be lead by the VISTA member, and the supervisor will work to empower the member throughout their service, provide feedback and offer opportunities for growth. 
2. Identifying on-going training opportunities to support the service-learning and professional development needed for the VISTA to be successful, while encouraging community involvement and building awareness; comprehensive training and orientation is initial and on-going. 
3. Promote team building activities and positive relationship development with other staff, volunteers, interns and AmeriCorps service members. 

10. How will you make certain that supervisors and members are aware of VISTA prohibited activities and ensure that member activities are allowable and consistent with the member’s VISTA Assignment Description (VAD)?

A copy of VISTA prohibited activities will be provided to the supervisors and member, and will be reviewed and discussed prior to the start of service and signed by both the supervisors and member. The VAD will also be reviewed and discussed at selection, stat of service and at supervisory meetings. The VAD was developed after a review of prohibited activities to ensure that all activities are allowable. Any questions that arise will be addressed with the United Way of Thurston County and the VISTA leader. 


11. Provide details in the table below of two required site-specific trainings you will provide for your member(s). (Do not include agency/project orientation as a site-specific training).  

Title of site-specific training
Description of training
Target date of training
Family Support Principles & Strengthening Families
Learn about guiding principles of strengthening families framework, includes protective factors for children, trauma informed care, strength-based approach, adverse childhood experiences, and hope. (Goal is to understand the core values involved in serving within a Family Support Center—this will help to assist in resource development and volunteer recruitment as well.)
August 2017
Volunteer Program Training
Child abuse and neglect mandated reporting training, roles/responsibilities, shelter/housing program overview, screening process, dispute resolution, community resources, programs, website, volunteer scheduling technology, shelter hotline for coordinated entry, safety/emergency protocol, background checks, maintaining in-direct service status. (Goal is for service member to understand volunteer roles so they can appropriately recruit, not to be a direct service volunteer)
August – September 2017

12. Which of the following resources will be available to the member(s) to perform service activities?  Check all that apply.
  Telephone/Voice Mail		  Fax				  Computer
  Agency E-Mail Account	  Internet Access		  Work Space
If you are not able to provide all of the above, please explain:  
     

13. Is your organization prepared to provide transportation or mileage reimbursement to VISTA member(s) to conduct service away from their established service site during service hours?
Yes	No		If no, please explain:       



Section III: PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

The AmeriCorps VISTA project activities that underlie your proposal must produce performance measures that align with national service focus areas and objectives. Priority of selection will go to projects that: 1) address the core principles of VISTA; 2) address critical unmet needs in the communities served; 4) include evidence-based interventions; and 5) have the ability to track and report data.  
 
1. What is the unmet need your project is addressing?

The Family Support Center of South Sound operates the largest 24-hour homeless shelter for children/families in our community, Pear Blossom Place. Our shelter and supportive housing program is the last resort in our community for homeless families with children, and largely operates on a volunteer model. Every year a minimum of 13,140 shelter bed nights are provided, serving approximately 100 of the South Sound’s most vulnerable and chronically homeless families with children. Family Support Center staff provide comprehensive and intensive services on-site at Pear Blossom Place every day from 7:00AM to 5:00PM, and rely on volunteers, work study students, and college interns to keep the shelter open every night. Although our agency has substantial expertise in providing supportive services with proven success in helping families to obtain and maintain stable housing, our funding for supportive services has been reduced despite the increase in the number of homeless families. Since opening on July 1, 2014 the shelter has consistently been full every single night, and during the cold weather season (November 15-April 30) an additional 20 beds are opened as a life saving measure when the temperature drops below 38°. Despite serving more families, being full every night, the resources do not exist to have staff on-site 24/7, thus volunteers continue to be a critical asset to the program. This VISTA project will increase the organization’s volunteer recruitment capacity, providing the opportunity to participate in key community outreach events, volunteer fairs, and build relationships with local schools and colleges in order to sustain the volunteer component at Pear Blossom Place. The VISTA project will also support with identifying potential financial and in-kind resources to maintain and increase the services available on-site at Pear Blossom Place for homeless families with children. This includes directly coordinating the Family Support Center’s annual holiday adoption program, connecting families at Pear Blossom Place with individuals and businesses in the community for holiday assistance. The Family Support Center is uniquely positioned as a community leader with the experience to successfully implement our proposed Strengthening Homeless Families VISTA project in Thurston County by developing capacity, resources, and strategic partnerships to assist homeless families at the greatest risk in achieving economic self-sufficiency.

2. List and describe data or research that supports the fact that this is an unmet need in your community.

The Family Support Center is the region’s leading multi service agency providing support services to thousands of families each year. Washington OSPI reported 1,512 homeless school aged children in Thurston County during the 2015-2016 school year; this does not account for children not enrolled in early learning or other school programs. Thus, it is estimated that more than 2,500 children, newborn to 18, are currently homeless in Thurston County. According to the American Psychological Association, homeless children experience higher toxic stress than their housed peers, with 74% chronically worrying about where they will sleep and 87% worrying something bad will happen to their parent. Pear Blossom Place is the largest 24-hour emergency shelter for homeless families in the South Sound region, serving the community’s most vulnerable, chronically homeless, unsheltered families with children. Pear Blossom Place family shelter has 36 beds (30 twin bunkbeds + 6 infant cribs); this represents 85% of the total family shelter beds available in the community, and during the cold weather months an additional 20 emergency beds are available on a night to night basis as a life saving measure. Pear Blossom Place family shelter is the last resort for homeless families who would otherwise be forced to sleep in their vehicles, tents, on the street or other unsafe location. As of February 10, 2017 there are more than 150 homeless families on the waiting list for Pear Blossom Place shelter; this includes 284 children under the age of 18 and 217 parents. Unsheltered families are the most vulnerable and need access to a safe, warm place to sleep while they work closely with a case manager to implement their long term housing plan. All homeless families, regardless if they are staying at Pear Blossom Place or are in a tent, car, or bouncing from place to place are offered comprehensive case management services and are provided the next available housing resource in order of where they are on the vulnerability list.

3. Provide evidence that supports the idea that the VISTA member’s interventions will improve the unmet need.

The Family Support Center utilizes evidence based and best practices in the development of all programs. The VISTA member’s service will support with the continued implementation and participation as Thurston County’s designated Coordinated Entry point for ALL homeless families with children. Coordinated has been identified by the State of Washington and the Washington Youth & Families Fund as a best practice in ending family homelessness by helping families quickly access shelter, services and stable housing. In addition, the Family Support Center’s services and shelter utilizes a “housing first model”, a known best practice for helping to move families as quickly as possible to stable housing, followed by supportive services to prevent a reoccurrence of future homelessness. In order to provide shelter, housing and supportive services, the Family Support Center needs sufficient funding, resources, community participation, and volunteers to operate Pear Blossom Place.

4. Provide a detailed description of the proposed VISTA project and the member’s role in the project.

The Strengthening Homeless Families VISTA project will work to directly increase the capacity and availability of services at Pear Blossom Place. Volunteer recruitment will be a core component of their service year. Recruitment and development of sustainable relationships with community groups such as Rotary, Kiwanis, Zonta, and other service clubs, colleges and universities, high schools, and other civic groups. The VISTA member will be responsible for establishing and nurturing the relationships, including building in modes of sustainability in the relationships (ie: Rotary Club X makes 12-month commitment to cover 1 shift a week). The VISTA member will also establish a resource development plan specific to Pear Blossom Place, identifying potential in-kind resources, financial opportunities such as grant and foundation support. Deadlines, requirements, contact information will be fathered by the VISTA member. Any proposals due during their VISTA term will be lead by the VISTA member, with support of their direct supervisor and the Development Director. The increased volunteer capacity and financial/in-kind resources will help to ensure the overall success of Pear Blossom Place, including the capacity of direct service staff’s ability to transition families from homelessness to permanent housing. 

5. Provide a detailed description of how your project addresses the VISTA core principles:
Anti-Poverty Focus: VISTA supports community efforts to overcome poverty.  VISTA projects must be focused on moving people out of poverty in the community not just making it more tolerable.  
Community Empowerment: VISTA values the inherent strengths and resources of the community. VISTA expects project sponsors to involve residents of the community in planning, developing, and implementing the VISTA project.  This approach allows low-income individuals the freedom to speak for themselves in determining the projects that suit their specific needs.
Capacity Building:  VISTA expands the ability of sponsor organizations to fight poverty. Rather than providing direct services to low-income individuals and communities, VISTAs strengthen and support organizations by building infrastructure, expanding community partnerships, securing long-term resources, coordinating training for participants and much more.
Sustainable Solutions: VISTA projects should lead to building organizational or community capacity that will continue the efforts of the projects even after VISTA resources are withdrawn.  

Anti-Poverty Focus:  The Strengthening Homeless Families VISTA project is focused on supporting Thurston County’s efforts to end family homelessness. Pear Blossom Place family shelter and affordable housing project is focused on supporting homeless and impoverished families in quickly obtaining and maintaining permanent housing and achieving economic self-sufficiency. 
Community Empowerment:  This project will involve the VISTA member in partnering directly with community members, groups, civic groups, schools, and government/nonprofit organizations. 
Capacity Building:  This project will support and strengthen our agency’s capacity to build partnerships with community organizations, groups, and individuals in order to support the efforts of Pear Blossom Place in sheltering the community’s homeless families with children. The VISTA project is a direct link to increasing the volunteer capacity at Pear Blossom Place, in addition to the financial and resource capacity to effectively support families. 
Sustainable Solutions:  The VISTA service member will help to establish a long term sustainability plan to support the volunteer efforts at Pear Blossom Place, in addition to a resource development plan for the program. 


Section IV: VAD 

For each VISTA requested, name the agency where they will serve and briefly describe their main tasks and activities in the table below.  Additional Objectives and Activities can be added. 

The VISTA Assignment Description (VAD)
The VAD is a high-level project plan that sets project objectives, activities, steps in the process, and timelines. It communicates what the project will accomplish with AmeriCorps resources and must be reviewed and approved by our program officer at the Corporation for National and Community Service (CNCS), the federal agency that administers VISTA. VADs should clearly communicate the project workplan and expectations. However, the VAD is a “living document” that can change as your needs or the project may shift in response to the VISTA’s work and skills or changes in the operating environment.

You and your VISTA will use the VAD throughout the year to define the scope of the project and ensure the VISTA is on-track to complete the project’s objectives. At the regional AmeriCorps training that kicks off the service year, VISTAs will receive training that emphasizes the importance of the VAD, work to understand the VAD, and identify their questions. 
The elements of the VAD include the following:
An overarching project goal that identifies what the project will achieve. 
Example: “Increase the effectiveness of support for formerly-homeless adults transitioning into permanent housing by engaging community volunteers and staff in the implementation of a new resident hospitality program.”
An anti-poverty statement that clearly identifies how the project will fight poverty and impact clients
Example: “This project fights poverty by connecting residents to resources and programs to ensure their successful transition from homelessness to long-term permanent housing.”
Aligned activities that the VISTA will complete to achieve the project goal
Each activity statement should identify what that activity will achieve using language like “in order to” or “so that” that ties the activity to the project goal. For example: “Conduct focus groups with participants who exited the program early in order to identify common reasons for attrition and inform program improvements”
Each activity should be broken down into steps the VISTA will take to complete the activity
Each activity should include an expected timeline in months. For example: “February-October”
There is no ideal number of activities or steps in a VAD. Rather, include however many activities and steps are needed to fully detail the project plan. 

The language of the VAD is very important. Our program officer will screen the VAD for language that:

Focuses the project on anti-poverty work. The anti-poverty statement of the VAD is critical in explaining how the project will fight poverty. 
Focuses the project on capacity-building work. Activities or steps that suggest the VISTA is engaging directly with clients should be stated as one-time activities with a clear goal-related purpose. For example, it may be appropriate for a VISTA to shadow a case manager as part of their program orientation. An appropriate way to phrase this step would be: “Shadow case manager for two hours per week during the first month in order to understand program delivery and client experience for training purposes.”
Emphasizes VISTA ownership of the project. Avoid using words like “assist” and “support” because they suggest the VISTA will serve in an administrative role. VISTAs should be responsible for a significant body of work. 
Emphasizes the service aspect of VISTA. Avoid using the word “work” when possible. 
Limits prohibited activities (described below). 
Additional Considerations: Prohibited Activities
Because AmeriCorps VISTA members are considered a federal resource, there are a number of limitations on the types of activities and duties they can perform during their service year. When creating the VAD, keep in mind that CNCS prohibits VISTAs from performing certain activities or duties while serving as a VISTA. While on duty or perceived to be identified with the AmeriCorps program, VISTAs may not engage in any religious or political activity (partisan or non-partisan) that would result in identifying the AmeriCorps program with that activity. Prohibited activities include: 
1. Attempting to influence legislation or elections
2. Organizing or engaging in protests, petitions, boycotts or strikes
3. Pro- or anti-labor organizing
4. Conducting voter registration or transport voters to the polls
5. Showing partisanship
6. Providing religious instruction
7. Conducting worship services
8. Engaging in religious proselytizing
For each VISTA requested, name the agency where they will serve and briefly describe their main tasks and activities in the table below. A VAD template is attached in the email.  Additional Objectives and Activities can be added. 


Agency/Site:    Family Support Center of South Sound
City:	Olympia		Zip+4:	98501		Borough/Census Area:         Thurston County         
VISTA’s role/title:    Community Engagement Specialist 
VISTA project goal:  Increase leveraged resources, expand and strengthen partnerships, volunteer recruitment and financial resources. 
VISTA Member Activities and Steps Checklist
Planned Period of Work
Objective 1: Increase financial and in-kind resources to support the long term stability of Pear Blossom Place family shelter & affordable housing program and the clients served.  
Activity 1: Increase and develop relationships with local and regional business community; solicit monetary and in-kind donations, including coordination of the Family Support Center’s annual holiday adoption program. 
Activity 2: Establish a fund development plan for Pear Blossom Place to identify potential funding sources, timelines, requirements, and past history with funding sources
Activity 3: Research new funding and grant opportunities for Pear Blossom Place, taking the lead in developing the grant proposal 
Ongoing, 
July 2017 – 
July 2018
Objective 2: Develop and refine volunteer training and retention program
Activity 1: Further develop volunteer training program in order to improve a volunteer’s readiness and preparedness to volunteer at Pear Blossom Place. Activity 2: Identify outside speakers, trainings, best practices, and tools utilized by other organizations to support volunteers. 
Activity 3: Work with the Volunteer Coordinator to provide ongoing volunteer engagement and appreciation opportunities (such as monthly coffee/conversations, birthday cards and thank you notes, etc.) in order to improve overall volunteer retention 
Ongoing, 
July 2017 – July 2018
Objective 3: Recruit new volunteers for Pear Blossom Place family shelter 
Activity 1: Coordinate and facilitate all volunteer recruitment activities, including maintaining a calendar of events to participate in such as job fairs, internship fairs, speaking with local service clubs, tabling events, etc. 
Activity 2: Identify new recruitment avenues to engage with larger volunteer base, including colleges and universities and service clubs (Rotary, Kiwanis, Lions, etc), thus increasing capacity and long-term volunteer sustainability. 
Activity 3: Collaborate with other social service agencies utilizing volunteers to cross recruit, train, and utilize volunteers to best engage volunteers in our community. 
August 2017- July 2018
Objective 4: Engage in Family Support Center’s annual fundraising/event efforts and utilization of donor database
Activity 1: Coordinate and participate in agency fundraising events and activities, such as Annual Fall Breakfast, 100 Men Who Care, Mother’s Day 5K, Father’s Day 5K, and Camp HOPE specific events
Activity 2: Develop event sponsorship materials, tracking of requests, and identifying contacts for targeted potential sponsors 
Activity 3: Utilize Compass 360 software to input all donor information, grant and fundraising tracking, and to issue receipts and thank you letters immediately following events. 
Ongoing throughout VISTA term (events in October, May, June)





Section V: PERFORMANCE MEASURES

Use the Performance Measures chart at the end of this document to identify and record the performance measures your proposed project will be tracking, reporting on, and held accountable for. You must select one output and one outcome for the Capacity Building section as well as one Focus Area, Objective, Output, Outcome, and Strategy for the Performance Measures section. Please copy and paste your selected performance measures in the Performance Measures box and put the goal numbers in the box on the right.

Performance Measurement 

Capacity Building Performance Measures (see next page):
Output: G3-3.1 Number of community volunteers recruited by CNCS-supported organizations or national service participants

Outcome: G3-3.17. Dollar value of in-kind resources leveraged by CNCS-supported organizations or national service participants.

Performance Measures (see last two pages, must include at least one from each column)
Focus Area: Economic Opportunity
Objective: Housing
Outputs: O5: number of economically disadvantaged individuals receiving housing placement services
Outcomes:  O11: # of economically disadvantaged individuals transitioned into housing
Strategy/intervention: Assisting with access to housing; Assisting with finding housing; Assisting with finding resources to support housing

Goal Numbers


Output: 200


Outcome: $65,000





Outputs: 300

Outcomes: 250



Capacity Building Performance Measures (please identify one Output and one Outcome)
 
Output Performance Measures (choose one)
G3-3.1 Number of community volunteers recruited by CNCS-supported organizations or national service participants 
G3-3.2 Number of community volunteers managed by CNCS-supported organizations or national service participants 
G3-3.4 Number of organizations that received capacity building services from CNCS-supported organizations 
or national service participants. 
G3-3.5 Number of staff and community volunteers that received training (of one or more types) as a result of capacity building services provided by CNCS-supported organizations or national service participants 
G3-3.6 Number of organizations that completed a community assessment identifying goals and recommendations with the assistance of CNCS-supported organizations or national service participants 
G3-3.7 Hours of service contributed by community volunteers who were recruited by CNCS-supported organizations or national service participants 
G3-3.8 Hours of service contributed by community volunteers who were managed by CNCS-supported organizations or national service participants 

Outcome Performance Measures (choose one)
G3-3.3 Number of organizations implementing three or more effective volunteer management practices as a result of capacity building services provided by CNCS-supported organizations or national service participants 
G3-3.9 Number of organizations reporting that capacity building activities provided by CNCS-supported organizations or national service participants have helped to make the organization more efficient 
G3-3.10 Number of organizations reporting that capacity building activities provided by CNCS-supported organizations or national service participants have helped to make the organization more effective 
G3-3.11 Number of new systems and business processes (technology, performance management, training, etc.) or enhancements to existing systems and business processes put in place as a result of capacity building services provided by CNCS-supported organizations or national service participants 
G3-3.13 Number of additional activities completed and/or program outputs produced by the program as a result of capacity building services provided by CNCS-supported organizations or national service participants in a) Disaster Services, b) Economic Opportunity, c) Education, d) Environmental Stewardship, e) Healthy Futures and/or f) Veterans and Military Families 
G3-3.14 Number of organizations that have experienced an increase in requests for their programs and services as a result of capacity building services provided by CNCS-supported organizations or national service participants 
G3-3.15 Number of additional types of services offered by organizations as a result of capacity building services provided by CNCS-supported organizations or national service participants in a) Disaster Services, b) Economic 
Opportunity, c) Education, d) Environmental Stewardship, e) Healthy Futures and/or f) Veterans and Military Families 
G3-3.16. Dollar value of cash resources leveraged by CNCS-supported organizations or national service participants. 
G3-3.17. Dollar value of in-kind resources leveraged by CNCS-supported organizations or national service participants. 
G3-3.18. Number of new beneficiaries that received services as a result of capacity building efforts in a) Disaster Services, b) Economic Opportunity, c) Education, d) Environmental Stewardship, e) Healthy Futures and/or f) Veterans and Military Families. 
G3-3.19. Number of new beneficiaries from one or more targeted or underserved populations (counts by target population, e.g., racial or ethnic group) that received services as a result of capacity building efforts in a) Disaster Services, b) Economic Opportunity, c) Education, d) Environmental Stewardship, e) Healthy Futures and/or f) Veterans and Military Families.
Performance Measures
Focus Area
Objective
Outputs
Outcomes
Strategy/intervention
Economic Opportunity 
Financial Literacy
O1: Number of Economically Disadvantaged individuals receiving financial literacy services
O9: Individuals with improved financial knowledge
Assisting VITA
Income Tax Tutoring
Providing Financial Literacy Education

Housing
PRIORITY: O5: number of economically disadvantaged individuals receiving housing placement services

PRIORITY O11: # of economically disadvantaged individuals transitioned into housing
Assisting with access to housing
Assisting with finding housing
Assisting with finding resources to support housing
Building homes
Rehabilitating homes
Repairing homes


O4: number of housing units made available to low income people
none
Same

Employment
O2: # of economically disadvantaged individuals receiving job training or other skill development services
None
Adult Basic Education
Adult ESOL/ESL
Classroom based job skills training
Coaching/counseling
Helping with GED
Job placement services
On-the-job skills development 


O3: # of economically disadvantaged individuals receiving job placement services
O10 # of economically disadvantaged individuals placed in jobs
Same
Education
School Readiness
PRIORITY ED21: # of children who completed early childhood education programs
PR ED23: # of children demonstrating gains in social and/or emotional development
PR ED24: # of children demonstrating gains in literacy skills
PR ED25: # of children demonstrating gains in math skills
Family involvement
Prep for kindergarten

K-12 success
PR ED2: # of students who completed K-12 education programs
PR ED 27: # of students in mentoring/tutoring programs with improved academic engagement
PR ED5: # of students with improved academic performance in literacy and/or math
PR ED6: # of youth in mentoring/tutoring programs with improved attendance
Classroom teaching
Community school partnership
Family involvement
Mentoring 
Out-of-school time
Service learning
Summer learning
Teacher training
Tutoring 1-on-1
Tutoring small group
Other classroom support


PR ED4A: # of youth/mentor matches sustained
PR ED5: # of students with improved academic performance in literacy and/or math

Same

Post-secondary success
PR ED2: # of students who complete education programs
PR ED4A: # of youth/mentor matches sustained
ED1: # of students who start in a CNCS supported Education program
ED10: # of students entering post-secondary institutions
ED11: # of students earning a post-secondary degree
ED9: Students graduating from high school on time with a diploma

Same for all selected outputs

Same
Healthy Futures
Access to Care
H1: # of uninsured, economically disadvantaged individuals utilizing healthcare services/programs
H2: # of clients receiving info on health insurance, access, and benefits
H3: # of clients enrolled in health insurance and benefits programs
H4: # of clients participating in health education programs
H7: # of clients receiving language translation services
None
Clearinghouse
Coaching
Group interaction
Hotline
Individual interaction
Language translation services
One-on-one interaction 
Outreach
Presentation
Provision of healthcare services
Recruitment
Referrals
Training

Obesity and Food
PR H10: # of individuals receiving emergency food from food banks/other organizations
PR H11: # of individuals getting support, education, and/or referrals for hunger
PR H12: # individuals that reported increased food security

Community Garden
Emergency Food Collection
Emergency Food Distribution
Emergency Food Pantry Support
Emergency Food Preparation 
Life Skills Education/Training
Nutritional Services
Referrals
Veterans and Military Families
Vets and Families served
PR V1: # of vets receiving CNCS supported assistance
PR V7: military families receiving CNCS supported assistance
PR V8: # of vets family members receiving CNCS supported assistance
PR V9: # of active military service  members receiving CNCS supported assistance
None
Access to health care activity
Employment activity
Financial literacy
Housing activity
Obesity and food resources activities
Post-secondary success activity

Please send completed application to:
Stacy Hicks, Volunteer Programs Coordinator 
United Way of Thurston County
shicks@unitedway-thurston.org
shicks@unitedway-thurston.org 

