Nature of org: The Family Support Center of South Sound is a nonprofit 501c3 multi-service agency located in downtown Olympia, Washington, founded in 1992 to provide families with coordinated supportive services in one centralized location with the mission, “Working Together to Strengthen All Families”. The Family Support Center seeks to build strong, healthy, self-sufficient families through six collaborative programs and multiple services.  The Family Support Center diligently works to end family homelessness, poverty, and family violence in the South Sound region. Core programs include: Homeless Family Services, Pear Blossom Place: A Family Support Community, Family Resource Services, Parent & Child Education, Family Justice Center, and Supervised Visitation for Foster Children.

Duties & Responsibilities: 

Support staff at Pear Blossom Place, Thurston County's largest homeless family shelter, will support with the daily and evening operations. Answer phones and direct callers to the appropriate staff person or program. Remain knowledgeable about current shelter capacity, cold weather status, agency resources and community organizations. Screen visitors who arrive onsite to ensure they are authorized guests prior to allowing shelter access. Provide general supervision and support to shelter guests and their children. Assist case managers with various tasks such as scheduling appointments, following up with clients, completing assessments, etc. Assist guests with obtaining needed supplies. Utilize confidential shelter website to communicate necessary information with volunteers, and utilize client database to track case notes, resources and referrals secured.

Minimum qualifications: Must be over the age of 18. Must pass criminal background check with no criminal record. Ideal candidate has knowledge of Thurston County resources and services available to families with children, and experience working with families and children.

Educational benefits: This is a great opportunity for any student interested in gaining experience working directly with children and families, and those studying social work, human services, psychology, or human behavior etc. Students will learn about area resources and ways in which to support families.

How to apply- Interested students should contact Keiya Johnson, Homeless Family Services Program Manager. Position open until filled. 
