Some notes from Dispute Resolution Center 
June 8, 2015--Conference Room @ Family Support Center, 5:30-7:30PM
Trainers: Michael and Melissa 
Conflict Assessment Scale
*Tool used to assess where someone is at with their emotions, characterized on a scale from minimal-severe.  (See separate attachment)
*Use as a guide to discern your level of action and response, or approach to the situation
Example: Two people are at the intense level- yelling, emotional blackmail, disturbing peace of others, potentially moving into severe level.
Suggested Approach: “We might need to get someone help if we can’t talk about this calmly.”
*There is the implication of seeking on-call staff or law-enforcement without actually saying it. 
Be aware of your threshold! You make the call on what support you need!
Active Listening; 
Active listening is NOT; giving advice, agreeing, fixing the problem, telling your own story, asking “why?”
Active listening IS; checking for understanding and clarification, giving your attention. 
Example: “What I heard you say is…does that sound right?” “Can you explain _____ to me?”
*When mediating a conflict between more than one person as a third party:
“Can you summarize what you just heard?” 
Golden Questions—the keys to deescalating and calming:
*What is your greatest concern?
*What do you most want to see happen?
*What do you want the other person to understand?


Reframing:
A tool for restating what you heard from a different angle, when what is said is very hurtful, blaming or attacking. Usually starts with “Sounds like you would really appreciate…” “I hear that you really value…” “It sounds like you work best when…”
Example: She is such a pushover, always spoiling our son with everything he wants. 
Reframing: It sounds like you have your own ideas on how to parent. 
Example: Even though we are legally separated, he thinks he can still come and go in my house whenever he feels like it. 
Reframing: I hear that you value setting boundaries.
Making Requests:
Rather than fixing the problem for someone, you can help them prepare to fix the problem themselves by helping them rehearse a request.
Example: An upset mother calls looking for shelter for her and her children tonight—there is no space at Pear Blossom.  She is hesitant to ask her sister if she can stay tonight. 
“I hear that you need shelter and that you are concerned for your children. I want to help you practice making a request for help from your sister, so you can have  a safe place to stay tonight.” 

Additional notes: 
Although majority of attendees were volunteers/staff from Family Support Center, we invited 1-2 members from our partners with Side Walk and Community Youth Services to attend the training. Total of 15 attendees. 


