April 2, 2015
Attn: Mr. Brian Zongolowicz, Program Manager
The Satterberg Foundation
825 Securities Building
1904 Third Avenue
Seattle, WA 98101
Mr. Brian Zongolowicz;
On behalf of The Family Support Center of South Sound, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to be considered for sustainable funding in support of strengthening all families of Thurston County.
The Family Support Center of South Sound is a nonprofit 501c3 multi-service agency, developed in 1992 to provide coordinated supportive services in one centralized location to help families raise healthy children, strengthen family relationships, and develop economic self-sufficiency. Our mission is “Working Together to Strengthen All Families”. The Family Support Center seeks to build strong, healthy, self-sufficient families through a variety of collaborative programs and supportive services. Our goal is to reduce the impacts of family and child poverty, homelessness, child abuse & neglect, and family violence in our community by working together with other co-located and community partners to promote protective factors for children and families. With the intention of providing a “one-stop-shop”, families have access to on-site supportive services and assistance navigating multiple services through programs such as: Parent & Child Education providing free evidence based parent education classes, community cafés, family engagement activities, early learning, and on-site childcare for workshops and support groups. Homeless Family Services / Pear Blossom Place, is the coordinated entry point for ALL homeless families with children in Thurston County, offering the largest 24 hour emergency homeless family shelter, in addition to 7 permanent affordable housing units, and rapid re-housing. Additionally, during the cold weather season Nov. 15-April 15, we provide overflow space to additional families in need of shelter when outdoor temperatures drop below 38 degrees as a life-saving measure.  Family Resource Services provides families with access to basic needs including clothing, food, shelter, affordable healthcare, holiday assistance, transportation, diapers, and a kiosk connecting families to mainstream social services benefits. Family Justice Center is the second of its kind in Washington State, providing best practice collaborative and collocated community based and criminal justice services to domestic violence and sexual assault survivors, and partners closely with our organization. Supervised Visitation Foster Child Support provides safe visitation, sibling visits, and transportation. 

To aid and strengthen our capacity to continue meeting the many needs of our families, we are proposing a request for (*we have a choice; a one-year Open Grant up to $100,000 or a multi-year Open Grant up to $300,000 over 3 years.) As a one-stop social service providing a variety of resources to families in need, our funds are quickly depleted through rapid-rehousing as we aim to provide stable housing to Pear Blossom residents within 20-30 days best practice; through rental or utility assistance; through transportation costs; through enhancing bilingual and cultural supportive services to underserved communities; through maintaining safety and security of the shelter facility; among a variety of other costs that exceed our current annual budget of ($$$). 
We feel very fortunate to passionately serve our families with dignity, respect, compassion and with the belief that all families deserve opportunities for growth; families are the fabric of community and the human experience. Your funding will enable us to preserve our mission of serving each family in need of supportive services, and will ultimately impact the life-long outcome for future generations overcoming the challenges of poverty; through unconditional love, education and resiliency. 
We sincerely thank you for your consideration of our proposal for funding, and for learning more about the Family Support Center of South Sound. Please do not hesitate if you have any further questions or concerns.

Yours respectfully,

(signature)
