Family Visitation Monitor
Strengthening Foundations Counseling LLC - Olympia, WA
This job posting is no longer available on Indeed.

Related searches:

Family Visitation Monitor jobs in Olympia, WA
Strengthening Foundations Counseling LLC jobs in Olympia, WA
Part-time
Description:

Selected team members will provide supportive services to children removed from their homes and placed into state care due to allegations of neglect or abuse. You will facilitate scheduled visits between these children and their parents by transporting to/from the visit location in your own vehicle, monitoring the visit and documenting the interaction. This vital service helps maintain family bonds and is a key part in informing the social working in the court case.

You will remain with the child at all times, supervise the visit to ensure the child’s well-being, intervene when necessary, communicate visitation guidelines to the visiting parent(s) while observing and accurately recording what happened during the visit. These visits will often take place at our Tumwater facility but can also happen at other locations such as the DSHS offices, local parks or libraries.

Available hours will be primarily evening and weekend hours. Both full-time and part-time opportunities are available.

Applicants must have at least a year and half of documented experience working with children in a professional setting (not your own children or family), have good written and oral communication skills, and the ability to work with people of all backgrounds.

Requirements:

Ability to work evenings and one weekend day
A flexible schedule to accommodate the needs of the children
Must possess a high school diploma, GED or college degree
Must be at least 21 years of age
Clearance of DSHS state criminal background check required
Valid Driver's License with a clean driving record
Washington State Drivers Abstract
Current CPR/First Aid and Bloodborne Pathogens certification (We can train you)
Able to work with little supervision

Strengthening Foundations Counseling LLC is a growing mental health agency offering services in Cowlitz, Lewis, Pacific, Wahkiakum, Thurston, Grays Harbor, Mason, Pierce, Jefferson, Kitsap and Clallam counties. Dignity and respect are cornerstones in our interactions with people we serve and our employees. We create an inclusive and supportive culture through encouragement, engagement and trust. The successful candidate will help us continue honoring our philosophy.

Strengthening Foundations Counseling does not and shall not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion (creed), gender, gender expression, age, national origin (ancestry), disability, marital status, sexual orientation, or military status, in any of its activities or operations. These activities include, but are not limited to, hiring and firing of staff, selection of volunteers and vendors, and provision of services. We are committed to providing an inclusive and welcoming environment for all members of our staff, clients, volunteers, subcontractors, vendors, and clients.

Job Type: Full-time

Salary: $12.00 /hour

Job Type: Full-time

Required education:

High school or equivalent
Required experience:

Child care: 2 years
